initial content for framework (#34)
cncf/cnf-wg: doc/README.md

# CNF Working Group

## Table of Contents
* [Introduction](#intro)
* [Scope](#scope)
* [Best Practices for CNF Developers](#best_cnf_dev)

<a name="intro"></a>
## Introduction

> The goal of this group is to define a set of practices that can be used to evaluate how [cloud native](https://github.com/cloud-native-principles/cloud-native-principles) a CNF is. CNFs can be evaluated against those best practices through test cases that are developed by other open source projects like the [CNF Test Suite](https://github.com/cncf/cnf-conformance/blob/master/README-testsuite.md)

Reviewer: The CNF Test Suite doesn't specifically set out to test the [Cloud Native principles](https://github.com/cloud-native-principles/cloud-native-principles/blob/master/cloud-native-principles.md). In fact, Majority of the conformance tests are for Kubernetes rather than cloud native.

Author: @pgoyal01 i believe the plan is to expand the scope of cnf-conformance to implement those best practices we define here.

> The goal of this group is to define a set of practices that can be used to evaluate how [cloud native](https://github.com/cloud-native-principles/cloud-native-principles) a CNF is. CNFs can be evaluated against those best practices through test cases that are developed by other open source projects like the [CNF Test Suite](https://github.com/cncf/cnf-conformance/blob/master/README-testsuite.md)

Reviewer 2: Suggest to rewrite as:  The goal of this group is to define a set of practices to evaluate the extent to which a CNF is  [cloud native](https://github.com/cloud-native-principles/cloud-native-principles).

Author: Yes, like the change. done in https://github.com/cncf/cnf-wg/pull/34/commits/ad22897069f83f0ac72aadf7d3c6b2ebce49b8f4

Reviewer: Wnen we say, "how cloud native" are we going to specify something like Bronze, Silver, Gold?

> The goal of this group is to define a set of practices that can be used to evaluating how [cloud native](https://github.com/cloud-native-principles/cloud-native-principles) a CNF is. CNFs can be evaluated against those best practices through test cases that are developed by other open source projects like the [CNF Test Suite](https://github.com/cncf/cnf-conformance/blob/master/README-testsuite.md)

Reviewer 2: Change evaluating to evaluate

> The goal of this group is to define a set of practices that can be used to evaluating how [cloud native](https://github.com/cloud-native-principles/cloud-native-principles) a CNF is. CNFs can be evaluated against those best practices through test cases that are developed by other open source projects like the [CNF Test Suite](https://github.com/cncf/cnf-conformance/blob/master/README-testsuite.md)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The goal of this group is to define a set of practices that can be used to evaluate how [cloud native](https://github.com/cloud-native-principles/cloud-native-principles) a CNF is. CNFs can be evaluated against those best practices through test cases that are developed by other open source projects like the [CNF Test Suite](https://github.com/cncf/cnf-conformance/blob/master/README-testsuite.md)
```

CNF WG will rely on other industry initiatives (such as CNCF TUG) to come up wiht a definition of "cloud native" in relation to the telecom industry.

> As the telco industry transitions to cloud native ways of thinking, working, and operating, these best practices will serve as the industry gold standard of what cloud native means in practice. They can be used for a variety of purposes including in RFPs, to guide daily operations, and to do internal testing.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
As the telco industry transitions to cloud native ways of thinking, working, and operating, these best practices will serve as the industry gold standard of what cloud native means in practice. They can be used for a variety of purposes including guiding CNF design and development, in RFPs, to guide daily operations, and to do internal testing.
```

> As the telco industry transitions to cloud native ways of thinking, working, and operating, these best practices will serve as the industry gold standard of what cloud native means in practice. They can be used for a variety of purposes including in RFPs, to guide daily operations, and to do internal testing.

Reviewer 2: Maybe add that it also helps to guide CNF design/development

> Cloud native is not set point. The industry, technology, and best practices will continually evolve with each other. Thus, being cloud native should not be seen as pass/fail, but rather a spectrum. While it may be impossible for anything to be completely cloud native, implementing even one best practice can help improve business outcomes for everyone involved. Implementing more of them can have an even greater impact. However, depending upon the type of CNF, different best practices may have a greater or smaller impact on the ultimate business outcome. 

Reviewer: I think there have to be some principles designated as being required for something to be cloud native. Otherwise, anything and everything could be made out to be cloud native.

Author: @pgoyal01 i think the point here is as long as it proves to be best practices, backed up with data and user story, it indeed can be considered cloud native as there is no strict definition of what is cloud native.

Reviewer: @rabi-abdel Agree that there is no strict definition of cloud-native and that is why it is important to not just list them and state that even if one practice is adopted that is good enough. We could have the situation with widely different CNFs for the same NF depending upon the vendor or version.

Wouldn't it be better, if a required set of practices is defined to qualify as cloud-native?

- **Development of CNFs**: Set of best practices that helps CNF Developers to build their CNFs in a cloud native way.
- **Operation of CNFs**: Set of best practices that helps CNF Operators to deploy and manage CNFs in a cloud native way.
- **Building of CNF Infrastructure**: Set of best practices that helps CNF Infrastructure developers to build and develop CNF Infrastucture in a cloud native way.
- **Operation of CNF Infrastructure**: Set of best practices that helps CNF Infra Operators to deploy and manage CNF infrastructure in cloud native way.

<p align="center"><img src="./figures/cnf-wg-scope.png" alt="scope" title="Scope" width="100%"/></p>
<p align="center"><b>Figure 1-2:</b> Current Scope of CNF WG</p>

The current focus of CNF WG is to define the best practices for the development and deployment of CNFs. Other areas are left for future focus.

<a name="Best Practices for CNF Developer"></a>
## Best Practices for CNF Developers

* [Configuration and Lifecycle](./best_cnf_dev.md#1.0)
* [Installable and Upgradeable](./best_cnf_dev.md#2.0)
* [Hardware support](./best_cnf_dev.md#3.0)
* [Microservice](./best_cnf_dev.md#4.0)
* [Compatiblity](./best_cnf_dev.md#5.0)

> * [Stateless](./best_cnf_dev.md#6.0)

Reviewer 2: There are CNFs that have a role in managing state such as the CHF (Charging Function) as part of a 5G Core.  I certainly understand the point of developing stateless microservices but I feel we ALSO need to address how state can be managed in acceptable cloud native ways when necessary.  This type of guidance would be especially valuable for those applications (CNFs) that are managing state under very high transaction volumes (10-100k's of TPS) - again think of the CHF as just one example.

Reviewer 4: I just think we need to be clear the difference between application state and transaction / session state and so having a series of stateless microservices (which are therefore immutable) deal with stateful transactions (where that state is held in e.g. CHF) isn't necessarily a problem.

Reviewer 2: Maybe CHF is not the best example.  Let's take the CCS or UDR.  Both of these are the source of state for other NFs in the 5G Core.  They not only are state aware is my point, they own the state.  So if you are vendor designing one of these functions (or a service provider looking to buy one of these functions) then best practices for how state should be maintained for these types of NFs is going to be very valuable/important.

Reviewer 4: I don't disagree - but even with those applications there will be stateful components (e.g. datastore) and stateless components that simply process transactions and perform logic.  But as a whole the CCS application is stateful, from the point of view of customer state.  But many components within CCS will be stateless from the point of view of needing to have prior knowledge of that customer state to be able to process transactions and perform business logic - they just accept an API instruction and product a response.

> * [Stateless](./best_cnf_dev.md#6.0)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* [State](./best_cnf_dev.md#6.0)
```

# CNF Working Group

## Table of Contents
* [Introduction](#intro)
* [Scope](#scope)
* [Best Practices for CNF Developers](#best_cnf_dev)

<a name="intro"></a>
## Introduction

> The goal of this group is to define set of practices in which CNF can be evaluated on to dtermine how cloud native a CNF is (based on those best practices). CNF can be evaluated against those best practices thourhg test cases that are developed by other complimentary open source projects.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The goal of this group is to define a set of practices against which CNFs can be evaluated to determine how [cloud native](https://github.com/cloud-native-principles/cloud-native-principles) native a CNF is based on those best practices. CNFs can be evaluated against those best practices throught test cases that are developed by other complimentary open source projects like the [CNF Test Suite](https://github.com/cncf/cnf-conformance/blob/master/README-testsuite.md)
```

> The goal of this group is to define set of practices in which CNF can be evaluated on to dtermine how cloud native a CNF is (based on those best practices). CNF can be evaluated against those best practices thourhg test cases that are developed by other complimentary open source projects.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The goal of CNF Working Group (WG) is to define set of practices in which CNF can be evaluated on to dtermine how cloud native a CNF is (based on those best practices). CNF can be evaluated against those best practices thourhg test cases that are developed by other complimentary open source projects.
```

> The goal of this group is to define set of practices in which CNF can be evaluated on to dtermine how cloud native a CNF is (based on those best practices). CNF can be evaluated against those best practices thourhg test cases that are developed by other complimentary open source projects.

Author: done

> The goal of CNF-WG is not trying to define what cloud native for netowrk function is. CNF-WG will rely on other industry inititaves (such as CNCF TUG) to define that.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The goal of CNF WG is not trying to define what cloud native for netowrk function is. CNF-WG will rely on other industry inititaves (such as CNCF TUG) to define that.
```

Reviewer 4: @xmulligan there is a second instance of `CNF-WG` on that line.

Reviewer 4: (and multiple elsewhere in the doc - we should look to be consistent throughout)

Reviewer 3: Thanks, I tried to be consistent throughout as not having the dash, but I missed this one.

> The goal of CNF-WG is not trying to define what cloud native for netowrk function is. CNF-WG will rely on other industry inititaves (such as CNCF TUG) to define that.

Reviewer 3: Can you expand on this a little more?

Author: have added a diagram.

>> take more about how those best practices can be consumed by the industry (relation to other industry bodies)

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
As the telco industry transitions to cloud native ways of thinking, working, and operating, these best practices will serve as the industry gold standard of what cloud native means in practice. They can be for a variety of purposes including being used in RFPs, to guide daily operations, and to do internal testing.
```

>> List other complientary opensource projects.

>> Add Figure here to show the relation btween CNF-WG, CNTT, CNF-Testbed, LFN OVP, etc.

>> Talk about Type for each best practice (RECOMMEND, RECOMMEND NOT, SHOULD, SHOULD NOT, MUST, MUST_NOT)

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Cloud native is not set point. The industry, technology, and best practices will continually evolve with each other. Thus, being cloud native should not be seen as pass/fail, but rather a spectrum. While it may be impossible for anything to be completely cloud native, implementing even one best practice can help improve business outcomes for everyone involved. Implemting more of them can have an even greater impact. However, depending upon the type of CNF, different best practices may have a greater or smaller impact on the ultimate business outcome. 
```

Type will move from recommend - must as we build more confidence and get validation from real life deployment and get more community feedback.

- **RECOMMEND**:
- **RECOMMEND NOT**:
- **SHOULD**:
- **SHOULD NOT**:
- **MUST**:

> - **MUST NOT**:

Reviewer 3: Rather than having this, one idea was to have scoring whereby people using a test suite can provide different weights depending upon how important different aspects of cloud native are. @rabi-abdel what do you think of this?

https://github.com/cncf/cnf-conformance/blob/master/scoring_config/points_v1.yml

Author: makes sense.

<a name="scope"></a>
## Scope

> As demonstrated by **Figure 1-1** below, When it comes to Cloud Native Network Functions (CNFs), there are many areas that can be foucused on in order to determine different best practices for different Actors. they are:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
As demonstrated by **Figure 1-1** below, When it comes to Cloud Native Network Functions (CNFs), there are many areas that can be focused on in order to determine different best practices for different Actors. They are:
```

- **Consumption of CNFs**: Set of best pracitices that helps Customers/Consumers to sonsume and use CNFs in a cloud native way. 
- **Development of CNFs**: Set of best practices that helps CNF Vendors to develop their CNFs in a cloud native way.
- **Operation of CNFs**: Set of best practices that helps CNF Operators to deploy and manage CNFs in a cloud native way.
- **Building of CNF Infrastructure**: Set of best practices that helps CNF Infra Vendors to build and develop CNF Infrastucture in a cloud native way.
- **Operation of CNF Infrastructure**: Set of best practices that helps CNF Infra Operators to deploy and manage CNF infrastucture in cloud native way.

<p align="center"><img src="./figures/cnf-wg-scope.png" alt="scope" title="Scope" width="100%"/></p>

> <p align="center"><b>Figure 1-1:</b> Current Scope of CNF-WG</p>

Reviewer 5: I think not all of the CNF is in the scope of CNF WG. I would put everything related to the interaction with the infrastructure to the scope of CNTT RA2.

Reviewer 3: I think that is what he is saying below.

Author: @CsatariGergely comments addressed

> The current focus of CNF-WG is to define the best practices for the Development of CNFs. Other areas are left for future focus.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The current focus of CNF WG is to define the best practices for the Development of CNFs. Other areas are left for future focus.
```

# CNF Working Group

## Table of Contents
* [Introduction](#intro)
* [Scope](#scope)
* [Best Practices for CNF Developers](#best_cnf_dev)

<a name="intro"></a>
## Introduction

> The goal of this group is to define a set of practices against which CNFs can be evaluated to determine how [cloud native](https://github.com/cloud-native-principles/cloud-native-principles) a CNF is based on those best practices. CNFs can be evaluated against those best practices through test cases that are developed by other complimentary open source projects like the [CNF Test Suite](https://github.com/cncf/cnf-conformance/blob/master/README-testsuite.md)

Reviewer: This sentence can be simplified.
```suggestion
The goal of this group is to define a set of practices that can be used for evaluating of how [cloud native](https://github.com/cloud-native-principles/cloud-native-principles) a CNF. CNFs can be evaluated against those best practices through test cases that are developed by other open source projects like the [CNF Test Suite](https://github.com/cncf/cnf-conformance/blob/master/README-testsuite.md)
```

> The goal of CNF WG is not trying to define what cloud native for netowrk function is. CNF WG will rely on other industry inititaves (such as CNCF TUG) to define that.

Reviewer: Could we turn this positive? For example,
```suggestion
CNF WG will rely on other industry initiatives (such as CNCF TUG) to define the characteristics of a "cloud native" artifact.
```

> As the telco industry transitions to cloud native ways of thinking, working, and operating, these best practices will serve as the industry gold standard of what cloud native means in practice. They can be for a variety of purposes including being used in RFPs, to guide daily operations, and to do internal testing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As the telco industry transitions to cloud native ways of thinking, working, and operating, these best practices will serve as the industry gold standard of what cloud native means in practice. They can be used for a variety of purposes including in RFPs, to guide daily operations, and to do internal testing.
```

> Cloud native is not set point. The industry, technology, and best practices will continually evolve with each other. Thus, being cloud native should not be seen as pass/fail, but rather a spectrum. While it may be impossible for anything to be completely cloud native, implementing even one best practice can help improve business outcomes for everyone involved. Implemting more of them can have an even greater impact. However, depending upon the type of CNF, different best practices may have a greater or smaller impact on the ultimate business outcome. 

Reviewer: Is this is not somewhat contradictory from what is stated previously? "gold standard of what cloud native means in practice",

Author: not sure about minimum characteristics. everything that is proven to be best practice though user stories, test cases, results will qualify.

> 

Reviewer 6: We need to be more concrete and explicit in showing the purpose of this recommendations and other outcomes and show the basic value add.

Usage for RFPs is certainly very good point in that direction.

To make it stronger I would formulate following "These recommendations shall serve as generic contract between CNFs and cloud native infrastructure / platforms. If both any CNF and any platform follow these recommendations it should be assured that they will run nicely together out-of-box. In a sense fulfilling this contract represents implicit (pre)certification that the combination can be used in the production."

This would be very powerful and motivating contract and goal to reach.

Author: Address in https://github.com/cncf/cnf-wg/pull/34/commits/afe6763e5bb42aee7a8076cc605fe9822db1a2df

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

These recommendations can serve as a generic contract between CNFs and cloud native infrastructure. If both a CNF and a platform follow these recommendations, they can run more smoothly together out-of-box. In a sense fulfilling this contract represents implicit (pre)certification that the combination can be used in the production.
```

<!-- Type will move from recommend - must as we build more confidence and get validation from real life deployment and get more community feedback.
- **RECOMMEND**:
- **RECOMMEND NOT**:
- **SHOULD**:
- **SHOULD NOT**:
- **MUST**:
- **MUST NOT**:
-->

**Figure 1-1** below illustrate CNF WG relation to other communities and how best practices defined by CNF WG are consumed.

<p align="center"><img src="./figures/cnf-wg-relation.png" alt="scope" title="Scope" width="100%"/></p>
<p align="center"><b>Figure 1-1:</b> CNF WG Relation with other industry communities</p>

<a name="scope"></a>
## Scope

As demonstrated by **Figure 1-2** below, When it comes to Cloud Native Network Functions (CNFs), there are many areas that can be focused on in order to determine different best practices for different Actors. They are:

> - **Consumption of CNFs**: Set of best pracitices that helps Customers/Consumers to consume and use CNFs in a cloud native way. 

Reviewer 7: I'd suggest to change `best practices` for `expectations` or `behaviors` given that they only define requirements.
```suggestion
- **Consumption of CNFs**: Set of behaviors expected by Customers/Consumers when CNFs are consumed in a cloud native way. 
```

> - **Consumption of CNFs**: Set of best pracitices that helps Customers/Consumers to consume and use CNFs in a cloud native way. 

Author: we used best practices in everywhere. i suggest sticking to it.

> - **Consumption of CNFs**: Set of best pracitices that helps Customers/Consumers to consume and use CNFs in a cloud native way. 

Reviewer 4: @rabi-abdel agreed. Can we correct the spelling though :)
```suggestion
- **Consumption of CNFs**: Set of best practices that helps Customers/Consumers to consume and use CNFs in a cloud native way. 
```

> - **Development of CNFs**: Set of best practices that helps CNF Vendors to develop their CNFs in a cloud native way.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **Development of CNFs**: Set of best practices that helps CNF Vendors and developers to build their CNFs in a cloud native way.
```

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
- **Development of CNFs**: Set of best practices that helps CNF Developers to build their CNFs in a cloud native way.
```

> - **Operation of CNFs**: Set of best practices that helps CNF Operators to deploy and manage CNFs in a cloud native way.

Reviewer 7: Ideally(in a state of the art CNF) this set of practices doesn't have to exist , isn't it? Auto-healing, auto-scaling, CI/CD, etc pretend to eliminate any kind of operation.

> - **Building of CNF Infrastructure**: Set of best practices that helps CNF Infra Vendors to build and develop CNF Infrastucture in a cloud native way.

Reviewer 6: Add CNF Infra Vendors and Developers as not all Infra comes from vendors. Some are using directly upstream with some integrations and sys engineering (DT case), while others are developing their own OSS projects (e.g. ATT with Airship)

Reviewer 3: added suggestions

> - **Building of CNF Infrastructure**: Set of best practices that helps CNF Infra Vendors to build and develop CNF Infrastucture in a cloud native way.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **Building of CNF Infrastructure**: Set of best practices that helps CNF Infra Vendors and developers to build and develop CNF Infrastucture in a cloud native way.
```

Reviewer 6: why not generalizing and staying on roles of individuals instead of organizations. Eliminate terms vendors, SPs and others and keep only CNF developers, platform developers, CNF operators, platform operators.

> - **Operation of CNF Infrastructure**: Set of best practices that helps CNF Infra Operators to deploy and manage CNF infrastucture in cloud native way.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
- **Operation of CNF Infrastructure**: Set of best practices that helps CNF Infra Operators to deploy and manage CNF infrastructure in cloud native way.
```

<p align="center"><img src="./figures/cnf-wg-scope.png" alt="scope" title="Scope" width="100%"/></p>
<p align="center"><b>Figure 1-2:</b> Current Scope of CNF WG</p>

> The current focus of CNF WG is to define the best practices for the Development of CNFs. Other areas are left for future focus.

Reviewer 6: Development is done in order that something gets deployed so it in turns helps deployment. This is where CNF-Infra contract aspect comes into play. I would recommend to include that.

Reviewer 3: Do you have a suggested wording?

Reviewer 6: long version:
"The current focus of CNF WG is to define the best practices for the Development & Deployment of CNFs which can be used as guidelines for development of efficient CNFs and cloud native infra/platforms for CNFs. These best practices represent in turn a generic contract between CNFs and cloud native infa/platforms that can be widely used to certify if CNF can run as expected on the platform or vice versa if the platform is suitable for CNFs that follow the best practices. Other areas are left for future focus."

short version:
"The current focus of CNF WG is to define the best practices for the Development & Deployment of CNFs. Other areas are left for future focus."

> The current focus of CNF WG is to define the best practices for the Development of CNFs. Other areas are left for future focus.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The current focus of CNF WG is to define the best practices for the development and deployment of CNFs. Other areas are left for future focus.
```

<a name="Best Practices for CNF Developer"></a>

> ## Best Practices for CNF Developers

Reviewer 7: Can we include `Portability` as a best practice for CNFs?

Author: Yes, this can be submitted though a template.

* [Configuration and Lifecycle](./best_cnf_dev.md#1.0)

> * [Installable and Upgradeable](./best_cnf_dev.md#2.0)

Reviewer 7: Shouldn't be better to use `Day 1` and `Day 2` operations terms here?

Author: i wont encourage it. this will open a can of worm :) there is not industry wide agreement of Days and what they mean.
